---
layout: home
---
Welcome to my technical blog!

On this site, I will post a loose collection of small articles that,
in my estimation, are not sufficiently substantial to deserve
publication as full paper or talk, nor deserve a separate Git
repository of their own, but still would make me sad, if deposited
onto the dump of forgetting.  This blog also ingests tools and
techniques such that parts of this material may make their way into
future papers or talks one way or another.

Just think of [Fermat's Last
Theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fermat%27s_Last_Theorem).  He
had in mind a proof for the assumption that no three positive integers
\\(a\\), \\(b\\), and \\(c\\) satisfy the equation \\(a^n + b^n =
c^n\\) for any integer value of \\(n\\) greater than 2, but did not
have enough space to scribble it down in the margin of a copy of the
Ancient Greek text
[Arithmetica](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetica).  Still, he
obviously considered his proof not being sufficiently important to be
published elsewhere, such that, very sadly, we do not know anything
even about just his idea for a proof, regardless whether it did work
or not.  Actually, most likely, he was wrong in believing he could
prove his theorem just in a little bit more of space.  Finally, more
than 300 years later, Fermat's theorem itself proved to be right,
though requiring a highly complex proof.  If Fermat only had kept a
blog, he could have published there at least his idea for a proof.

In fact, there are often ideas by far not as relevant as Fermat's
comment, that, at first sight, do not seem being worth to be worked
out in full detail, or corollaries, or even findings from meanders and
dead ends, but which may be still in general interesting to know, as
they may contain enlightning insights into the overall topic.  Some
authors use the opportunity of writing textbooks to utilize bycatch
insights as inspiration for creating excercises for students for
further elaboration.  Since I am currently not writing any textbook, I
use this blog instead as an abode for otherwise homeless knowledge.

I reserve the right to subsequently make changes such as minor
corrections or additions to existing blog posts.  If you want to track
the full history of a specific blog post, you may look into its
revision history in the associated [Git
repository](https://github.com/soundpaint/blog), that holds the source
files of this blog.
